So you don't translate step by step but just what's important ok. This is an, an, this
is an interview, can you please say it in Hebrew an interview with Simcha Bialowitz
To the camera?
What? she'll ask eh, eh, questions and I have to, I'll eh, eh, answer them. You
Ok. He wants you to ask him questions and then he'll answer. Now, Simcha
Simcha Bialowitz um
This is an interview with Simcha Bialowitz
And when was he born?
When were you born?
Eh, the twelfth year, eh, eh
1912?
eh, I think in February]
February 1912
Uh, pleaseummaybe he can talk about, um Izbica]
Can you please talk about Izbica?
Yes
How, how, in Hebrew, yes?
Yes, you, yes, and I'll tell her in English
Ah so eh, eh, I was born in Poland Izbica only Jews lived there, in the town
Izbica was just an, eh, Jewish community.
and I went to to to school there, in a, in a school, a polish school, in Poland, it was
in Poland, the teachers, and also eh, eh, a Jewish teacher who taught religion.
SpNN Religion is like, eh like Hebrew Bible?
Shhhhhhh
SpNN Yes
shhh
SpNN [German text]
He studied in a Polish school, he had a Jewish teacher who taught em, Jewish
[German text]
Tell him to speak Hebrew too
Yes, I, I need you to talk to me in Hebrew because I don't understand
Oh, in Hebrew?
Yes sorry.
So I'm telling you, in Hebrew, she, she wants me to explain in Hebrew, yes?
Yes, yes, certainly.
Izbica is, is a small town, eh, [German text]
Talk in Hebrew!
Oh, in Hebrew?
Yes.
Poles were living, eh, around the town.
I understood.
And, and, and in in, a few, a few Jews lived, eh Pole, eh, Poles, only Jews] In
the rest of the places – only Jews, and in in, in a few places there were also
Poles, they lived inside the, inside the . was a small town, Izbica?
Do you understand?
No. No
spNN Izbica was a very small town and it was almost all Jewish, a few
Polish people living here and there but mostly all Jews and in the
There were
spNN surrounding it were Polish
there were only two teachers who were Jewish, and they taught religion
There were only two Jewish teachers who taught uh religion
Yes, yes, and they lived at the, at the, the pharmacist, at the pharmacu,
the pharma, in, in the pharmacy, they lived there, he was a Jew?
Ok.
And they lived there, at his place, it was a big flat, big flats.
The teachers lived at a pharmacist's
They lived at his place.
house?
And that's why when they lived there, there, and they would teach eh, religion at the
Polish school, which I also attended, so I, eh, there was something, so I, eh its in, in
Polish or in Hebrew so, so, and, and she, the one that lived at the pharmacist's, so, eh,
he, he looked for someone, and they were teachers, in the school, they taught religion .
so, eh, they asked for someone eh, a kid from school eh, for him, the pharmacist. So they
said ok, so they took me from the, the, they asked if I wanted and I said
Mmhmm.
So I would start, I would also, also go to the, to the
pharma, pharma, pharmacy, there, I would work there,
Ok, one second I'll translate
And also eh, from the school, I would go there after school, and I worked
there. When I started to work, I didn't know anything! Afterwards I knew
He's saying that the two teachers that were living at the pharmacists house they, um, were
the only two Jewish teachers in the whole Polish school that he attended and they asked
him if he wanted to work at the Pharmacists, um, after school and he said yes and he was
going to school in the mor, in the morning and after that working at the pharmacists and,
um, at the beginning he didn't know anything but then he started to learn.
Yes.
Did he have many brothers and sisters?
Did you have any brothers or sisters?
Who?
Brothers? Yes, yes.
Yes
I had brothers. Yes, there remains, I'm only left with, my brother and I are
left, there was one brother. I had another brother that passed away.
You had two brothers and one of them passed away?
Yes, yes
He had two brothers.
Not oneleft. He is in America now.
One of them is in America?
Philip? You spoke to Philip? He remains (still alive). He was in Poland, and then he went during the
war when we were in Germany also, so he, from Germany he went to to America, from Germany, yes.
He went from, Philip went from Germany to America?
And I stayed and I stayed here in Poland, I worked at the pharmacy, he was a Jew,
and when the war started, so, so, the, eh, my pharmacist, eh, I don't know what
happened to him, he wasn't in Poland, he went somewhere and didn't come back.
Mmhmm
So I stayed there, I also worked at the pharmacy and afterwards he also had a drug store,
a drug store, a drug, drug, so, so I finished, I did, drug store, drug store, drug store
Eh
Drug store.
Yes.
Where you don't, you don't prepare the drugs they are already ready for use.
Yes, ok. He um, eh, the pharmacist was a Jew and he was, he went, he doesn't
remember where but he went somewhere and, before the war, and then he was working
at the pharmacist's and he was also working at the drug store
I worked there at the, eh, afterwards eh, eh, the pharmacy, eh, eh, he went someplace and didn't
come back, they don't know what happened to him, yes? So eh I didn't work there anymore
Mmhmm
There was a Pole, a Goy, a Goy, a Pole took over the drug store.
Ah, ok.
So I didn't work for him.
The uh, uh gentile Polish, um, took over the pharmacist's because
the, the Jewish pharmacist, he doesn't know where he went but
And, and I worked at the drug store, the pharmacist had a drug store, a drug store,
and I stayed there, a relative of the, the pharmacist, so, eh, he took me to the to
the drug store, the drug store, cosmetics are there and all these things there,
Yes
also drugs that were already ready for use.
That's why he had to move to work at the drug store because the gentile Polish was
Which year was this?
What year was this?
I can tell you, I before the war, what year was that, before the
war, wait a minute I don't remember exactly, before the war.
He doesn't remember it.
When the war started.
Ok eh, eh thank you. Ekiminate also in video
It was before, before the war afterwards he, they ,eh, he went somewhere and didn't come back,
the pharmacist, I don't know what happened to her, and I worked at the pharma pharmacy there
not at the pharmacy, at the, the cosmetics, the drug store, the drug store, drug store,
He's repeating what he said before.
Yes.
That's ok.
Yes, and I worked there and .? the school and they were all Poles in the school, Poles, and only
two Jewesses, the sisters that lived at the pharmacist's, so they, eh, they, religion,
Mmhmm
I don't know what happened to them and I don't know what happened to the
pharmacist, he went somewhere and didn't come back, I was in Poland now,
Mmm.
So I was at the Pharmacy.
I was at Poland right, eh, now and I was at the, the drugstore when, in his trip to Poland, now.
I was there now, so I went to the pharmacist, I told him that I'm he doesn't know me, but I said that
I'm he said you have to be careful, here, because there are Polish youths here that stand there, in the
corner, and they, every person that passes by they beat him, so I mustn't go there. So, eh
He said eh, the Polish, he went to the drugstore and he said you don't know
me but I used to work here and then the person that was working at the pharmacist's
today said, eh, you have to be careful because there are polish guys that are
standing at the end of the street and they're, uh, hitting people.
Yes, ok.
Continue.
Yes.
So I was there, in the town, I was at the pharmacy, I talked to, to, to the, to the person
that's there now, he asked me all sorts of things, I told him I worked there.
Mmhmm.
He told me not to go there, to the corner, they're standing there and hitting .
So I went to a woman there, that she eh, that she lives in that town
an older lady, whenever I came there, I would stay with her.
Mmhmm.
I would sleep there, at her place and, there, she afterwards she came to us, to Israel,
Ah
like on a, what's it called like on a trip, she came, came over .
He's saying, um, that there was a woman there that, um, he slept, he used to, he knew when he was
living in Poland and in this trip when he came to Poland now, the few years, um, she, he said hello
to her and he saw her and she came to Israel and she visited their house in Israel and
In let us go back to Izbica, please translate
Em please tell us more about Izbica?
Izbica?
Can he please describe a little bit his house and Friday night and
Can you tell us a bit about your house, what it looked like?
Yes, of course.
What were Friday nights like?
There's no, no house there now, they, they already destroyed,
I mean, all the old houses, they're all, eh eh
Mmhmm. The house was destroyed
Yes,
there's no house there now.
so if I come there, I'd stay with her, that woman, that polish woman, that
And when you lived there?
that they, eh, are rich, they have, um, a what's it called, where you make flour, I mean, eh,
that, they own one there. And they know me, so when I, I, I come I stay with her, I stay there.
When I go out, to take a walk, she comes with me so that they won't beat me, so eh,
Uh, he's saying there's
there are, there's there are Polish youths that stand there in the, in the center
Yes.
and they, eh if someone passes by, a Jew, they beat him there. It's also close to
the ceme, cemetery, eh, eh, that town and the cemetery, it's inside the town
Moment, yeah?
Em, he's saying the house, there's, the house isn't, doesn't exist there anymore, its destroyed,
and um, he's talking about now when he came back he, because there was no house to go to, um,
he had to stay at this woman's house and she would go with him everywhere because, so that they
wouldn't beat him up, the Polish, um I'll ask him about the memories?
Tell him I have never been to Izbica so I want him to think very deeply and try to
remember and describe for me his house. Was it a huge house was it a small house?
Ok em
What else?
Can you, because we were never there, can you please tell us about your house, the house you lived in,
before it was destroyed, if it was a big house or if it was a small house, what it looked like?
The house that we lived in doesn't, doesn't exist anymore,
Yes, before
they destroyed everything there, all the houses, the houses
were, eh, like, only Jews were living in that town.
Yes.
The Poles lived around the town, at the borders so everything's
destroyed there, and the, and the house was eh, at the center.
Mmhmm it was in the center.
My father, my father would work at a at a factory, a leather factory eh, eh
His father worked
Shh shhh
And now there is nothing there, only, only an empty lot,
Mmhmm
and also when you come there its close to the cemetery, the cemetery
was in, almost inside the town, on the edge, on a hill,
Ok.
His father worked at a tanning factory, um, a leather factory and the, uh,
cemetery was right in the center, center of the town, on a hill and
Was it
And the h-houses where we lived, almost all of them, they destroyed them
all, there is just an empty lot and some shops now, that's all that's
there now and if they build then they build, they build new houses
Mmhmm
and I wanted to see the teachers there [?, I was afraid to go out, so I thought that
when I come back again, I'll go there. The Polish teachers that brought, they knew me
when I worked at the pharmacy and and I was in charge there, I was their student
Yes, em he's saying the whole neighborhood now is ruined, there's
nothing there anymore, eh, it's empty and um he was looking for
He's talking about sadness yes. Um, was his family very religious?
Was your family very religious?
Eh, eh my family? of course, I had, I had relatives, an uncle who lived there as well, and
Religious? A religious family?
What?
A religious family?
A family
A very religious family?
Religious, yes, religious, religious in the center, he had a shop there
as well and now, they're no longer there, not there anymore.
He's saying yes, the family was religious
And I had other relatives who lived close to the ceme, cemetery there, the
cemetery was in the center, inside, inside the town eh on the border,
Its ok its good fantastic.
He's saying um when I asked him about if his family was religious so he said yes,
uh, and my, I had an uncle who lived there, he worked, um, he had a shop and he's
saying again about the cemetery that's in the center of the town.
It's important, it's important for the geography, please, please
tell him that that's my opinion, that cemeteries
Yes, the cemetery that's in the center
The cemetery, it was on the border of the, of the, of the town, practically in the, in the center.
It's important for the geography.
Yes, yes, yes. And there were no Poles inside the town, hardly any, one that had a flour factory.
Mmhmm.
He, he lived there and others only at
The only Polish living there had a, had a flour factory.
Yes they would live at the border of the, of the town, of that town.
Mmhmm.
And only a few Poles lived inside the town, and only at the border.
There were villages nearby, I mean, no, what's it called [Yiddish
text] in Yiddish you say [Yiddish text], that's, eh, eh eh
Village.
Village, eh, like a village?
A village?
A small town?
Yes, yes, that's right, that's right, that's right.
Only the Poles lived there, in the, in the,
The only polish people living were in the surroundings of the city, like the
My father, eh
suburbs.
would, work at a leather factory
Mmhmm.
and now, during, during the war he did it alone, the owners of the factory,
they're not there, they left the town and no one knew what happened to them,
if they're alive or not, there's no one there that's it.
The owners of the factory that his father worked at, um, nobody
knows what happened to them today, maybe, they don't know.
And in, and in this town, the houses, all the houses, the houses were old, not tall, only, only, eh
Less tall?
What? There was a house or two that were two, three stories high, the others were small, that's
how it was. And the synagogue the big , now I heard that they destroyed the synagogue there.
All the houses in the village were very, um, were very low two, three floors and, eh,
there was a big synagogue but he heard that the synagogue was destroyed as well.
Did he go to the synagogue often?
Did you go to the synagogue often?
What? Father was religious, with a beard, like, a big one.
Who, father?
Father, yes, certainly, and, and du, during, each morning
he would open the, uh, the eh, the syna , the synagogue,
Mmhmm.
what's it called, what's it called , where, eh, eh, , what's it called
His father was very religious, he had a long beard and he would every day go to the synagogue?
My father my father was religious, he would sit in the
syna, syna, synagogue next to the rabbi there,
His father would sit next to the rabbi in the synagogue?
where and once I it was on a Saturday, there was something in school, so
I had to shave, I shaved and I came, I came to the synagogue, so, so eh,
the rabbi said "come here come here, why are you?" he, he, he.
He said that one day
[German text]
He said that one day he, uh, had to shave for an occasion and, um, then he went to the synagogue
and the rabbi came up to him and like, patted his cheek and said what's this?!
If I shaved it was on a Saturday
Because it was on a Saturday.
uh huh so uh, the teachers were, everything was, Poles and they lived, I wanted to, now
If I'll be there I'll go there, I couldn't because I had to leave immediately,
Mmhmm.
I was scared to be there for too long a time. And I came there, so I went to the pharmacy
and he told me where to go, where to go and where not to go, because of,
Mmhmm.
I told him that I came, there was a Jew before,
eh, Gold, Goldheimer
Goldheimer?
Goldheimer, Goldheimer, he went he didn't sell it, and now, during the war he, he disappeared,
no one knows what happened to him and now there's someone, a Pole there, so I went to the
town, to the pharmacy, he already knows I worked there, at the school, the teachers would
live at the pharmacists, at the flat there, there was a big flat
Mmhmm.
so uh, they lived there, now, he said that he needs a kid from school, like that,
so eh, she, they took me, brought me to the, to the, the pharmacy there, and I started
working there, afterwards eh, eh, eh, eh, I didn't, didn't study there to be a,
I would only, I learned, I was, drug store, in the drug store,
Mmhmm.
but I knew, I knew how to make drugs because I worked at the, at the,
at the, they lived there, at the pharmacist's, the teachers,
Yes.
the Jewesses, so they, two sisters, so they eh, said, he told them I'm looking for a kid from
school that can work for me. So they, ok, they brought me, I started working there, afterwards
I would already prepare the medicine, so, on the other table, and in the, in the, in the laboratory
there, he would prepare ointments, all sorts of things, by himself
Mmhmm.
and he told me how to do it, I would already know, and also, pills
Yes.
Moment, moment.
for headaches
Please, moment, moment.
One minute, I'll just tell her what you're saying.
Moment, yeah?
Um, he was repeating the, the story about how he was, eh, the two teachers
were recommending him to work at the pharmacist's house and then when he came
there, he's repeating that when he came there, um, the new pharmacist
Sent him away, yes.
sent him, no, he just told him that, don't go there because there are polish guys that will
beat you up and, um, and he's saying though that the, the flat at the pharmacists was very large
and um, where the two teachers were living, and um and when, uh. he sta, first started working
there, he didn't know anything but he would watch as the pharmacist would make, um.
Recipes
recipes, and medicine and drugs and then he started doing it himself as well.
I was told that he also worked in a hospital. Can you ask him if that is true?
She was told that you worked at a hospital as well.
Yes.
Is that true?
That's right, yes, I also worked at a hospital, now, now, during the war.
During the war.
During the war, oh its later, it's later, please translate
No, no not the war eh, I worked at a hospital
It was later, after the
Ah, and there, inside the inside the, eh, what's it called
where they make, eh, where they make .?, what's it called
It's not important if he doesn't remember.
It's, if, it's not important if you don't remember.
What?
It's not important, if you don't remember, its ok.
No, I worked there, at the pharmacy, and I would also work at the, at the, what's
it called a place where there were only cosmetics, they had in polish it's .
Can you ask him when he did meet for the first time Germans and he did see them coming?
When was the first time that you saw Germans?
When?
Yes.
Germans, I saw Germans?
Mmhmm.
When the, eh, in forty, forty, forty nine, I think, when the war
Ok, and then they came to the town?
Then they, then they, yes, of course.
At forty nine they came to the town.
Thirty nine?
Forty nine.
Many, many Jews also came from, from, from Germany, eh, eh, to Zamosh, the
big city, and afterwards, eh, the Germans came to, eh, Zamosh, so they, eh,
sent all the Jews to, to Izbica, it was very close to this town.
They came, the Germans came to a big ci, town called Zamosh
and they sent all the Jews from there to Izbica?
I know.
M-m-my father my father who was, who was, when the Germans
came, there were transports to death camps
Mmhmm.
so eh, he, he, he was on a train, inside the, so he jumped off the train
Mmm
Jumped off, when it turns the corner, it slows, slows, slows down, so he jumped off, so they caught
him, the, eh, Poles, and, and turned him, turned him over to the, to the, to the Germans?
Um, the transport, the trains would go out from Izbica and, um, his father was on one
of these trains and at the, as, as they were turning his father jumped off the train
and, eh, the Polish caught him and gave him to the Germans, turned him in.
They took him and to the ce, cemetery and killed him there.
They took him to the cemetery and killed him there
And his mother?
What else?
And your mother?
What?
Your mother?
My mother came to Sobibor, mother and a, eh, two sisters
Mmhmm.
and also a child, of my, of my, of my sister's, she had a baby girl in her arms, she held
her. When they came there, so I, so I was already there in, in, in Germany in, eh so, in Sobibor
so they came to, to Sobibor, they were brought, eh, to Sobibor and they knew that I was there,
so eh, she came with a package, I said I don't need it, what do I need a package for? I
don't know what was in the package, money or something, I didn't want to take it, Go back!
So that they, in the tra, transport, already, in ger, in, in, sobi, Sobibor, they were brought
to Sobibor, I eh, I was already in Sobibor prior to that.
Ok.
Yes.
Yes and they came
I would work there at a, at a at a warehouse, eh, near the transport so when eh I came eh
One moment, I'll just translate.
What?
I'll just translate one moment.
He's saying he was in Sobibor and his, um, sis, his mother and his sister and, um, they had
a child with them as well and, um, he was, they came he was already there and, um, then he's
saying that someone gave him a package and he, he didn't want to take it um
We we came, we were near Sobibor there, there, we were close by, a
large group of us was standing there. So they came to Sobibor,
Mmhmm.
And they already knew where they were headed. So she brought me, she knew I was outside, eh, so
she ran to me and wanted to give it to me, I didn't want to take it, what do I need it for?
Uh, who wanted
And she returned there, she returned there, there.
Was this your mother?
No, it was a sister,
Your sister.
a sister a sister, mother stayed at the place where they were
received, mother and another, another, another sister.
Yes.
Um his mother and his sister was, were, um, when they went to Sobibor, and so they were at, um,
the entrance, and then his other sister gave him a package and he didn't want to take it.
N-now the whole town there was demolished, there aren't any houses, only those shops that
were in the center, they're still there. Everything was demolished, demolished, demolished.
And now, um, the Poles, eh, build houses, and also the synagogue was demolished.
The whole city is ruined, only the stores that were in the center of the town
are still there, and a lot of Polish people are building there now.
I suggest we, we s-
When we came to Sobi, Sobi, Sobibor, I eh, once or twice came here, so eh, I was very frightened,
I went to the, I went to the, eh, pharmacy, the pharmacy, where he knows me already
Mmhmm.
so eh, he said don't hang around here eh, they'll kill you, they'll
beat you, so I don't go there because I'm scared.
He's saying again that he went to the pharmacist and he told him not to go out because of the polish
So I go th-there sometimes when I go, I don't usually go but when I go there, there's a Polish woman
they have a, um, um flour, flour factory there, she knows me and when I go, I stay at her place.
When he's, when he goes there he's staying at a Polish woman's
house who had a factory for flour and she knows him.
Thank you very much, I suggest we have a short break.
Ok, let's take a short break?
What?
A short break?
Yes, fine.
[break]
We speak about Zamosh?
Mmhmm. Tell us, you were saying?[ ]
What?
You started to say in Zamosh
No, when I wanted to go to Zamosh, so eh, I was told that, eh I for, forgot what I wanted to say.
He forgot what he wanted to say. That's ok
I asked him um before we stopped, I asked him how he for the first time met
Germans? Can he remember when he saw for the first time Ger Germans?
What?
Em, can you, eh, remember when you saw Germans for the first time?
Germans?
Yes, Germans?
um, the first time
It doesn't matter tell him, tell him
It doesn't matter if you don't remember.
Please, can he tell me how he came to Sobibor? Was he picked up, h- how?
What? What?
How did you get to Sobibor, were you picked up ?
How did I get there?
Mmhmm.
No, I got there with a transport a transport, so eh,
The transport trains.
But how did he get into the transport?
So eh, so eh
How did you get into the transport?
What? I got there with a transport?
How did you get to the transport, from home, or
No, the, um, Germans, um, um, took, took me, us, to a car
Yes.
and we drove to, to, they brought us over there. And I was there and they started looking
for, my brother was also there with me, we were together. It was the last transport?
Mmhmm.
So eh I was there I forgot what I
The Germans took us by car to there and my brother was there, it was the last transport?
I forgot, wait a minute
Can he talk about Sobibor?
I forgot, I wanted to say something.
It's ok.
I will yet recall.
Its ok, he forgot what he wanted to say. Can you please talk about Sobibor?
What?
Can you please talk about Sobibor?
About Sobibor?
Yes.
Sobibor, so, when they took, took me there, in the transport, me, and my brother
was there, and other people, so they started looking for a person with professional
skills, they started looking but that's, we need for that, for that, eh
Yes, yes we want to hear.
Yes? No, it's also, it's also, it's a lot, yes?
spSL This is important, this is important.
Yes? Yes?
Yes, it's important, yes.
So they started looking for people with professional skills and so, eh, the man a pharmacist,
Mmhmm.
a person with professional skills, doctors,
They were looking for professionals
a pharmacist, a pharmacist. I wasn't a pharmacist, I worked at the pharmacist's,
but eh I worked at the drug store, the drug store. So eh,
They asked for a pharmacist
so I raised my hand, and they took me. So he, he heard, my brother was in
the transport with the other people, so he sneaked over to where I was,
Mmhmm.
he already knew that he was in the transport to go to Sobibor to be killed.
So he, he came to me, he came towards me, and stayed close to me the
whole time and that's how he, that's how he stayed alive.
When they came, when they got there, they asked if anyone has a profession, they were asking,
and he said he was a pharmacist and his brother was already, was in the train already and,
um, he was, he sneaked up and hid behind him and that's how he, he was saved.
Yes, eh other transports arrived there, I was already there,
and I said that I eh wait a minute a pharmacist,
Mmhmm.
a pharmacist, eh, many people came there, pharmacists, doctors, all sorts. There was medicine
and they didn't know what to do with it. I know, I knew, so eh, they took me (to work) as
a pharmacist and I ran errands so VWagner came he saw that I, everybody, killed, eh, eh, and
he wanted to kill, to kill me, so he said to him "I need him" I stayed alive.
He's saying
He said it, the one who protects me, who's in the hospital now Demjanjuk]
Mmhmm. He's saying um that everyone started saying I'm a doctor I'm a pharmacist when
they were asking and, um, and then they were about to kill him because, well he didn't
say why but he was saying they were about to kill me and then, um, Vagner came and, um,
said no I'm going to, don't kill him and, eh, that's how he stayed alive.
What did he say about Demjanjuk?
And then he said Demjanjuk, that, WVagner and then he said Demjanjuk, but he didn't say
What
He just said Demjanjuk said Ill, I'll
Ok, it's ok. So he lived in eh in
Heh, heh, she's not, not happy with me for saying things like this.
She's not happy because I'm saying these kind of things.
No you are, tell him he is doing wonderful and we will speak with her afterwards.
You are wonderful and really helpful and we will speak with
her afterwards. So you, you are great, you're wonderful.
I sincerely hope when I have
Eh, eh, I, I have more to say if you ask more questions,
ask me more questions, eh, its not over is it?
No, no, no, no, eh, I mean, if it's ok by you, we would really like to continue.
Fine, fine, fine.
He's asking if it's over
No, I want
but he said that he can say more things, of course.
Please!
spI What?
Please, please!
We want to hear more, please.
SpNN [German text]
spSL [German text]
Um, please talk more about Sobibor?
spI What?
Please continue talking about Sobibor?
Sobibor?
Mmhmm
Fine in Sobibor, when I, eh, worked there for him, I needed, he needed me because,
doctors would come, a pharmacist. There was medicine in the packages
Mmhmm.
and they didn't know what to do, so they needed a specialist. And I said that I'm
a pharmacist, so I was there he came, he came, Vagner came and killed everyone there.
He wanted to kill me so he said don't kill him I need him, he needed me.
Who said that?
Him what's his name Demjanjuk?
[German text]
He said that all the, uh, doctors and the professionals didn't know what to
do with, didn't know what to do with the medicine so he said I'm a pharmacist,
so they needed a specialist with medicine, so he filled that hole and
He said you can kill everyone except for him, I need
him for the medicine eh, a pharmacist, tell her.
And VWagner came and said he wanted to kill everyone and Demjanjuk came and said no, um, I,
That's ok.
he's, he's, eh, we have to save him .
She's not happy because I'm saying good things about, about him, because he would also kill, eh
She's not happy that he's saying good things about him because he was also
It's ok.
That's ok
He needed me so eh, eh, he said , he needed me for , what would he do with all the medicine,
they would have thrown them out, I looked, I knew, I worked with it in the past,
Mmhmm. He needed him because he knew everything about medicine.
I I worked at the drugstore I would examine the medicine, I knew, eh
Does he still know the day he arrived in the camp?
Does he still know?
The day he arrived? Maybe it's in his brain still?
Do you remember the day you arrived at the camp?
What?
The day you arrived at the camp?
That day?
Mmhmm. The first day you arrived.
Or the month.
I don't remember.
When was it?
I don't remember the day.
It's too difficult, yes so how long did he stay in Sobibor?
What?
For how long did you stay in Sobibor?
How long?
Mmhmm.
Was I in Sobibor?
About.
spI Approximately, I don't remember, but enough time because
eh eh they did, they did an there those who worked there, I mean,
Uprising.
spI I, eh, don't know what it's called, what's it called
He's not sure, he's saying enough time to, and then it's
It's ok.
Sorry.
Um
spI What happened?
What else can he tell?
spI How much time, I don't remember
Did he work as a
spI How much time was I there, there? Till the escape from there.
Till the escape from there.
Mmhmm. Did he work all the time as a pharmacist in Sobibor or as a nurse?
And did you work all the time as a, eh, pharmacist or as a nurse?
There?
Yes, in Sobibor?
No, I worked there only as a pharmacist,
Just as a pharmacist.
eh , the packages that would arrive, there was a pile of them,
so I, downstairs, in the basement, so I would fine.
There were packages that would come and he would he would rummage through them and
When I was in, in that group, in the transport
Mmhmm.
and I was l-l-lying down, there, on the, on the floor,
so he came I already told you, he came VWagner
Mmhmm.
and wanted to kill me
he killed everybody, everyone who was there, and he said don't kill him
Mmhmm.
I need him, for the
He's saying again, eh, that he was at the transport and then VWagner came and wanted
to kill him and he killed everybody else and then he was saved when Demjanjuk came.
I was lucky, I was lucky
I'm happy he was not killed.
What?
We're happy that you weren't .that you survived that day, we're very happy.
Yes.
Ok. Um can he remember anything he can tell me about Sobibor?
Do you have anything you
I laid there on the floor,
Mmhmm.
he killed everyone, he came and took out, he wanted to kill
me and then he said, stop, I need him don't kill him.
He was lying there in the transport and then VWagner came and wanted to kill him.
But then he was brought to the labor camp, I assume
And you got to the labor camp from there?
Ah? From there
You were brought to the labor camp from there?
Yes.
Mmhmm.
And there, did he have a special place?
Did you have a special place there?
What?
In the labor camp did you have a
There was a place for the medicine.
Where the medicines were.
Eh, eh, eh, the pharma, it was like the pharmacy, there were all sorts of things that needed to
be organized, everything was written, written out, I was familiar with them, so I would there
I would sort the medicines out because nobody knew the names and I would
Doctors would come, would come, and also pharmacists
Mmhmm.
and the drugs were in the, eh, packages
Mmhmm. Doctors and pharmacists would come
so they wouldn't know what to do with it,
and they wouldn't know what to do with it.
so I would he would have killed me also but he knew that I, I could do , eh, eh, this and
that, and I would prepare packages for him as well, he would tell me to prepare a package
for him you already know, he said, this, this and that. He gave me a list and I prepared everything
for him and he took it when he went home, on a leave, took it with him yes.
He would give me a list of medicines to put in a package and I would do it and I would
put it in a package and he would take it when he went to vacation or out of the camp.
My brother my brother saw that they took me to work there that they looked for a pharmacist,
so he sneaked over, I told you already to the, to the group, he was a little boy, eh he
turned towards my group, he already knew that they took me, me to work, so he stayed alive.
So afterwards I had to protect him all the time till the escape.
His microphone.
Oh, excuse me.
Oh that.
The microphone.
Yes, yes.
Um, his brother was a little boy and, um, when he saw he had, they gave him work
to do there as a pharmacist, so his brother went from his group, they were divided
into groups and his brother went from his group to his group and he sneaked up
behind him and he had to watch him all the time afterwards.
He gave me a li, list, eh with all sorts of things, so I prepared
it for him, when he went on a leave he took it with him.
He gave him a list of drugs to, to pack for him and he would take it.
Can you thank him, nobody ever told me there was a pharmacy in Sobibor?
spI What?
Eh, nobody ever told she wasn't told that there was, there was a pharmacy in SpT Sobibor?
What?
She didn't know that, that there was a pharmacy in Sobibor?
So I thank him very much.
spI It wasn't a pharmacy it was like a warehouse and there
was medicine and I had to organize it, they didn't know.
It was like a basement with, with medicine, it wasn't really a pharmacy.
That's right, I sorted out everything, all the medicine that was there,
and organized this, this and that, it wasn't a pharmacy,
Yeah, it wasn't like a pharmacy pharmacy, it was just a basement
with a lot of drugs and medicine and he would sort it out
It was a warehouse, a warehouse for medicine
So I understood he also served Germans?
So you, eh also served Germans?
What?
Did you provide services for Germans?
No I couldn't do that
Mmhmm.
I only did I didn't give them when he went for vacation he took eh, all sorts of things there,
He just sorted it out and when the
so he gave me a list, prepare for me this, this and this,
I prepared it for him, and he took it when he left.
And, eh when the, the officer went from the camp for vacation
he took it with him but he didn't serve Germans or
Just the package, yes.
spNN Just the packages.
Um was he very scared? Was he very cold? Was he very hungry?
Um were you very scared? Were you very hungry? Were you cold?
What? What?
Can you remember if you were cold, if you were hungry, what
the conditions were like for you there, were you scared?
I was very scared that, that, but, eh, what could I do?
I was very scared but what can you do? There was nothing to do about that.
Did he know that his family was killed?
Did you know then that your family, eh,
What?
Did you know at the time that your family
Of course, I knew. My sister, we were standing here and they were already at the entrance
to the, so she brought me a package, maybe there was money in it or something for me,
they already knew, eh, where they were headed, they wanted me to take it but what do
I need it for, I didn't want to take it, what, what could I do?
He knew because his sister, eh, when they were di, divided into women and men and then, eh, his sister
walked, they already knew where they were going, and his sister tried to give him a package
They were already, they were already there, and we, the transport, we were there not too far away,
Mmhmm.
so she came to, eh, give it to me, eh, eh, eh, eh my mother held the,
the, the child and there was there was also a little girl and a, a boy
in her arms, her arms, they were already there to kill them.
His um his mother was holding the little child in her arms and they, they were already
waiting to kill them, the Germans and they all, the women knew where they were being
headed to and his sister rushed up, well, tried to give him a package but from the other
side, he, she, he, was already divided into the men's area and she rushed up to him and
tried to give him a package, he doesn't know what was in the package, he thinks maybe
money maybe something, but he doesn't know, he didn't take it.
Did he, uh, meet people from Holland in the camp?
Um did you meet people from Holland?
From
From Holland?
Yes, in the camp?
In the camp?
Mmhmm.
In the camp I was in?
Yes.
Yes, there were
Yes? Yes.
In the camp I was together with everybody else, there were
also people from Holland, yes, everyone, yes, Holland?
There was from everywhere and yes, there were also from Holland.
But did
And eh, eh, there were also transports from Holland, some transports, for killing them.
There were also transports from Holland to kill them, in order to kill them.
But he didn't have any particular contact?
Did you have any personal contact with someone from Holland?
Holland yes.
Personal?
Yes, with a woman, I don't remember her name, she's due to come visit me here from Holland
Yeah, there was one woman from Holland, he doesn't remember her name.
Mmhmm it was ..? So, can he tell a little bit about the
uprising, please, or does he first want to stop?
Eh do you want to take a break or do you want to tell us first about the uprising?
[German text]
I can continue.
Wait, he can he can continue.
You can continue? Yeah?
spI Should I continue?
Yes, Ok, so about the uprising
About the uprising?
How did he get to know about the uprising?
How did you know about the uprising?
How did I know?
Mmhmm.
I knew, of course I knew, eh, I had contact with eh people I would meet them.
He would meet the people that knew about the uprising.
Yes, first of all, eh, my brother was there, so he was, he was a little boy, so in
the end I let him, he p-polished shoes for the Germans there, he would do all sorts
of jobs, he, he told me that, that there, there was going to be an escape.
His brother was, um, working as, um, a shoe cleaner for the Germans and
he was the one that told him that there was going to be an escape.
And then
Yes
Huh?
And, so your brother told you that there was going to be an escape?
Yes, yes.
Yes
My brother said that they were preparing I prepared, what happened was
that all of a sudden I saw that WVagner was walking with, with, with
all these things in his hands, things, I prepared, eh poison.
What did you prepare?
A bottle.
Poison?
Poison, and
Sorry.
spI I prepared poison, a bottle, and that, a woman, a Jewess, who worked at the Ukrainian's kitchen,
Mmhmm.
so I so I, and, and another one worked at the at the German's kitchen, there were two, two kitchens,
Yes.
so I prepared poison,
Mmhmm.
a bottle, and, and, to give to her, the Jewess who worked at the, at the kitchen, so she can
put in their lunch I prepared .? big, a bottle like this, it was half the size of, it was a
bottle with poison, I prepared it in the phar, pharmacy, where I worked with the drugs,
Mmhmm.
and she was supposed to do it during lunchtime, she worked in the, in the kitchen, the, the Jewess,
Yes.
so eh there were Ukrainians there also, guarding the place, and one of
the Ukrainians escaped at one in the morning, he escaped, eh, outside
Ok one moment, I'll just translate so that I don't leave out any of the details, Ill just translate.
He's saying that, um, he made poison, he filled poison in a bottle because he was, eh, he had
access to the medicine and all these, so he made poison, he put poison in a bottle, about half
of this bottle, and, um, he gave it to a Jewish woman who was an inmate, who was working in the,
um, kitchens and there was a kitchen for the, the German kitchen, um there were Ukrainians who
were guarding the, the kitchen, the Ukrainians were guarding the kitchen?
No, one was for the Ukra Ukrainians, Ukrainians were there,
I understand.
spI one was for them, for the Germans, the Jewess worked
at the Ukranian's, eh so, eh we, I prepared poison,
Mmhmm.
I prepared two bottles, one for the Ukrainians and one for the and she had to put it in the food.
Mmhmm
I prepared a bottle and a bottle, she received it, so she went
and told one of the Ukrainians that was guarding the place,
Mmhmm
Ukrainian, Ukrainian,
Yes
that during the night someone escaped, he came to tell them . There was poison in the
food. So eh, all of a sudden I see, and at the day when it was supposed to happen, so
she came from the kitchen and Vagner came ho-holding the bottle of poison that I gave
them, they came, came to me! They came to me so he said that, that Demjanjuk]
Mmhmm.
overheard and said that it couldn't have happened here,
it's impossible for such thing to have happened here,
He, uh, made two bottles, poison bottles, one for the Ukrainians]
They came to me first! For giving the, and he said nothing like that can happen here.
Yes
Everything is, eh sealed, all the medicine, everything that
was there, especially something as unique as , so eh
And he
So, so, so they, eh, all of a sudden they, the woman from the kitchen
came, with the bo-bottle, and with Vagner, who came to me for me
Yes
So eh, so he said thatit's impossible for such a thing to have happened here.
He, eh made two poison bottles, eh, one for the Ukrainians and, kitchen, because there were two
kitchens, one for the Germans and one for the Ukrainians and, um, the night before this was, he
gave it to a Jewish woman working there, to put it in the food, and the night before this was supposed
to happen, she already had the bottles um, she told um, one of the Ukrainian guards and the next
morning Vagner and the woman, the woman came to him and wanted to, um, and then, uh, Demjanjuk
came and said there's nothing like this going on at our, there's, this cant happen, this is i-impossible,
nothing happened, it wasn't him. They thought it was him but Demjanjuk stood up and, and protected
him and said that these things don't happen here.
They thought that it could be, eh they didn't know that
I prepared it, eh, I prepared a bottle, I opened ,
, yeah.
, morphine, opium and put them in a bottle two bottles, one for
the Ukrainians and one for the S.S, for the, for the Germans,
He did it one for the Ukrainians and one for the Germans?
so eh .the woman from the, from the kitchen, she had a Ukrainian acquaintance that was
guarding the place, and one night, a Ukrainian escaped, they worked there so he ran away
from there, so eh they came to the place and wanted to know what, what happened, they
came, so she told, she told, she told me that she got, they came to me with the poison,
so eh, so eh so I said that it's impossible for such a thing to have happened here, everything,
everything is sealed, everything is sealed, its not from here.
They, they came to him
Demjanjuk]!
what is this the poison and he said and Demjanjuk said no, its not how, it
didn't happen from here and they showed him that all the bottles are
Closed
closed and haven't been opened and he protected him from this.
So nothing happened?
It was the poison that I made!
Yes, and it was the poison that I made because Vagner and the woman came with the poison
So he said these things don't happen here, everything
is sealed, is sealed, all of the drugs are sealed,
So nothing happened at all?
And in the end nothing happened?
No, nothing happened, nothing happened, no they took, no, they took, they
took the the, the, the woman from the kitchen, they took her and another
person, , nothing happened, I couldn't, we couldn't do anything.
Where did they take the woman from the kitchen?
What?
From the kitchen? The woman from the kitchen?
Yes, from the kitchen, from the kitchen, they took her from the kitchen and, and everything that happened,
they said eh, Vagner came to us to see him and he said that it couldn't have happened here.
Nothing bad happened
So then he lived on in the camp as a pharmacist till the uprising?
And you continued to work in the camp as a with the medicine till the escape?
Of course, of course, ooh, each time that he went home on a leave, so he, so he told
me to prepare a package, a medicine package, eh, he would tell, tell me what to do
You kept working till the escape?
Hah?
You kept working up to the escape?
Certainly.
Until the uprising I would make him packages he would take it home with him, the officer.
Ok we have a break,
Mmhmm.
and then I would like him to talk a little bit about the uprise and his escape, is that ok?
So we'll take a break?
What?
We'll take a short break?
Yes, a short break, yes
And afterwards we'll talk
[break]
Let's continue.
Why shouldn't I say things about Demjanjuk? They wanted, wanted to kill me, yes? WVagner]
Mmhmm.
killed everybody there, the people that were there, at the transport so they took the people
and killed them and burned them, so eh, so eh Vagner was, they wanted to take me as well,
Mmhmm.
he said, eh, I need, I need him, he needed me, there was such chaos there, the majority were
doctors and and, and, and pharmacists, pharmacist, in the, in the pharmacy, drugs, a lot of
drugs, I worked at the pharmacy, so I was familiar with them, that's all, so eh, I , there
was a mess, so he came, so he said he killed everybody there, all the people that were in the
transport , so I was, eh, there in the middle so he said: what about him so he wanted, so he
told him: not him, I need, eh ..? he needed me, if not for me he wouldn't have been able
to do , he wasn't, eh, wasn't a pharmacist, he didn't have the knowledge, and I had the
knowledge, so that's why they didn't, didn't, didn't kill me.
Well tell him, uh, it may be good for the tape, his wife says it's not Demjanjuk, it's Miller?
Eh, your wife tells us that it wasn't Demjanjuk, it was Miller,
that, that took you to work at the pharmacy at the
It doesn't matter, it doesn't matter.
But it doesn't matter.
Um, I wanted him to talk as much as he can about how he got out of the camp, during the uprising.
Eh, can you speak about, em how you got out of the camp, out of the camp, during the uprise?
How, how we knew?
How you got out? Please tell us.
So, we escaped, yes, and we talked about the escape that everyone knew about it.
And one time in the evening we said that and we escaped, we killed them, we already
had weapons, so we killed the, the, the guards, yes we escaped, so from there, I
I knew, so I left everything and I ran with them together, together
Everybody knew that it was going to happen and they had arms already and they killed the guards and
We went, we invited them to come to the office there, so that, eh, the tailor,
he, eh, eh, would make a, a, something like, what's it called,
A jacket?
so he, so he came for measurements there, he was invited, so, at the side of the room there was a niche,
there was a , so he, so me and another guy waited and when they, eh, took the hat off we jumped out,
wham, wham, we killed them, we also took their weapons, we didn't have weapons till then.
Mmhmm. One of the, eh, they called the German, the guards, to the, to, there was a tailor
there that had, and when the Ger, the guards, took their clothes off, and they jumped out
from a hiding place and they killed them and then they took the guard's arms, um
Yes
Did you tell her?
Yes.
W-without weapons you cant, eh, so we killed them, we took eh their weapons, eh, we took their
arms and then the, the weapons, the guns, and then, and then, then, we, we talked about it, in,
in the camp and then he saw us and we escaped and there weren't a lot of S.S soldiers, they weren't
there, we did it when they were outside, and in the, in the entrance, so they opened fire, so we
already had weapons, the ones we took, and we escaped in the water, that was the way to pass, so
we passed through, around it was water, but not deep, we escaped there
We escaped with the guns, we, uh, had to es, we had to go through, uh, like rivers
and there was a lot of water around the camp, and but it wasn't very deep and we
also did this, there weren't a lot of S.S in the camps when we when we escaped
because we did it at a time when the S.S. guards were outside, and, then
Ok, and where did he come to?
And where did you come to?
What?
After you escaped where did you
Everyone ran to a, a, wait a minute, it was at night, so we saw from a distance that they already, eh
,like a light, eh, eh, it was in the dark, there were ditches in the, in the road, on both sides, so
we laid down there and they passed by its good that they didn't see us or they would have killed us,
they, they drove by and again, we started to walk there, to run there, and everyone ran towards their
homes, where the, we ran in the direction of, it was close, in the direction of the, eh, it was close
to the camp, a group of us ran together and we came to a, a village, a village, so, so
Ok I'll, I'll translate
We, we didn't have guns only, only s-sticks, so we went to, to, to, to, to, to, to people
in a village somewhere, give us food! Heh, so they were scared so they gave us food.
Ok af, eh, after they, when they escaped, in the, surrounding the camp, there were roads and there
were tunnels, on each side of the road, and they, after they started running and all the lights came
on, because, eh they were, they escaped, they hid inside the tunnels and the cars, the German cars
didn't see them because it was dark and they, they, sur, they escaped there and after they fini,
after there were no German cars anymore they got up, they started running, he's saying everyone ran
to a place where he knew was their house but he went to, with ano, with a group of people, they ran
to the nearest village and they took, um, sticks and, uh, they went into a house and they said make
us some food and the people at the house were scared so they made them food.
You can make it short the translation.
Oh, sorry.
Ok?
SpNN Ok.
You are interrupting a little too much.
I'm sorry
Please continue.
What?
Yes, please, continue, so
No, in, when we were on the, on the road, we saw a light, it was during the evening, we saw a
light from the car, so we, eh, eh, I told you already, inside the, inside the deep ditches by
the road, we ran over there, we laid down, and they drove by, its good that and they didn't
see us, they took the, the, , the, the .? they would take them outside with the car
Mmhmm.
and we entered a village, we entered, eh, food,
Mmhmm,
We came so they gave us food, everyone ran to where he lived before, in that direction.
Everyone, he's, he repeated the story I told you, when everyone ran to where he lived before
Did he stay for a long time at the house he found?
And did you stay a long time at the house where they gave you food?
What?
Where they gave you food?
No, we took some food and kept on running, we were scared that they'll catch us, and, and once we saw
that they were driving, there was a light there, it was already evening, so we, in the ditches
Mmhmm.
near the roads, they pass, they passed by,
Yes.
but we, it was pretty deep there, and that's how, in every village we went to, to, to the,
eh, to, eh, in the village, to the peasants there, to, to, to the Poles there, in the village
there, and we said that we're from Sobibor so they gave us bread and this and that, and
we kept on going everyone ran in the direction of where he came from.
Mmhmm. He said eh eh, when, after, we just took the food
and then we continued running because we were scared.
From the village, from which village, ooh, eh eh, each person, eh, so ev, everyone ran together
and afterwards when they passed by we laid down there in the ditches, so that they wouldn't
be able to see us, and they didn't see, when they took the , heh, she doesn't what I'm
telling you she says I shouldn't say those things eh, about, about, eh, Demjanjuk, why
shouldn't I? he was good for me, yes, but eh, what he did was, eh
Ok, short.
Uh
Short.
Yeah, he didn't, he was repeating what he said.
Ok thank you.
Each person, no I told you, each person ran in the direction where he came from, we came
to our town, we went to, to, to the Poles there for food, and each person had a , each person
ran to the direction he came from, towards the village they used to live in.
Everyone escaped to their village, where they lived before and he came to a
How did he survive the following very cold winter?
How did you survive the winter, which was very cold?
No, we weren't cold, we didn't pay any attention to that, it wasn't in the winter.
Oh it wasn't in the winter?
No.
It wasn't in the winter.
Yeah, but later, later there was winter
Afterwards, after
Oh after that?
Yes.
Each person ran to where he came from,
Mmhmm.
so uh, each person had a place, where they knew a Pole or some other person, so they asked,
we'll pay you and you will give us some place, so we ran to our place, where the village
was, near their, their town, and we went to a Pole there, he already knew that we, eh, ran,
that we were at the camp, give us some place, we, in the basement we dug a hole and prepared
everything on the top , put soil on it, and you can come in from outside,
Mmhmm.
also from the inside, so eh, they gave us food there as well, the Poles,
He ran to his
and to acquaintances, each person ran in the direction where he had acquaintances.
and they stayed at a Pole's house and they, in a built shelter underground
Did he feel safe in that house?
Did you feel secure in the Pole's house?
Not so secure, but what can you do?
Not really.
And he stayed there till the Russians came?
And you stayed there till the Russians came?
What?
You stayed there till the Russians came?
With them, till, eh the Russians invaded Poland so we went out of these places that were,
Yes.
Did he see the Russians coming? When did he hear, how did he hear that the Russians were coming?
How did you hear the Russians were coming?
No, we were there, at night we used to go outside for a bit, at night,
Hmmm.
eh and we knew that, that, that, we heard that, that, that the war was
over, they already started, they passed in a village, not a town, a
village, each person had a Pole they knew in a village, so he,
Mmhmm.
we had a shelter in the basement, under the ground,
We would go out at night and hear
we would pay him, so eh
and we would pay him, the Polish person
Yes, so he made us room there, and he brought us food when the Russians
came, they passed through that place , so he said you can come out now,
your free now there are no, there are no Germans anymore.
When the Russians came, then the Polish person told him to get out
We got, got out, where to go?, each person went to the direction which he
came from, we were scared as well, the Poles also, eh, killed people that
came to them, they took everything from them and then killed them.
Ok.
We were scared because these Polish people also killed people
that came to hide in their house, but we paid them.
Sorry, what did you say?
He said we were scared also because these polish people also killed, um,
Did he stay in Poland after the liberation of Poland the invasion of Poland?
Um, did you stay in Poland after the Russians invaded Poland?
No, where?
After the Russians conquered Poland, did you stay in Poland?
We stayed in Poland, first of all, eh, we searched for a place, our city was small, we ran,
the town of Zamosh, her city, and there, each person looked for a place to stay at,
Mmhmm.
I came to her.
Ah.
Yes
We all looked for a place to stay at, we went to Zamosh, to our hometown and I stayed with her.
Uh, was he scared of the, um, situation in Zamosh, then?
What?
Please stay alive.
Oh, oh, I'm sorry.
Stay alive
What? What? What?
Were you afraid of the, were you afraid of the situation in Zamosh at the time?
Zamosh? No, I, eh, I was supposed to, Izbica, its 20 km from Zamosh, but I was already with her,
Mmhmm.
so eh, we were in Zamosh, no, no we weren't scared, then.
But he told that that he was scared of the Poles that
they would betray him before the Russians came,
What?
Can he tell a little bit more, did he know about people betrayed?
You said before that you were afraid, eh, of the Poles because they also
killed Jews, um did you know anyone that this happened to him?
No, I knew, I, eh when I came to, to, to the village, before we came there, I came to
acquaintances of mine, I was with them before we escaped, and I had acquaintances
Mmhmm.
from the village, when we escaped from the city to the village, so she was sick, the landlords
wife, so she had diabetes and needed injections, I would give her the injections there,
I went there, eh, eh everyone went to, to where they had acquaintances,
Mmhmm
so I was there and then they came and told us that the war was over, you can come out.
No, I went to a person that I already knew from before.
Was he with more people?
Were you with more people?
Or was he alone?
Huh?
Add, add to it: or was he alone?
Were you with more people or were you alone?
Who?
When you escaped, when you
In hiding
When you were in hiding, were you with other people or were you alone?
With more people?
Or were you alone?
No, I wasn't alone, I was with her no, she, eh, I met her
No
a woman, an acquaintance, from our town, with us, 20 km , so she says so, eh, she said
Try to explain the question.
When you hid
When you hid under the ground
the ground
Were you alone or were you with other people?
I was with other people, my brother,
I was with my brother
my brother, he's in America now, eh, and with other people, we were seven or eight people
Seven or eight people, one of them - my brother.
We were in the hole there, he dug a hole for us and we stayed there when the Russians came um,
they passed the, the war, they passed the, so he said you can come out now, the war's over.
And when the Russians came he told us we can get out, we can go out because the war's over.
So in Zamosh he met his wife, Leah?
In Zamosh you met your wife, Leah?
What? Yes, I met her a woman saw me and said Simcha, I have a cousin, she met her cousin.
Mmhmm
Where? She said: here, so I went over there and, her cousin, heh, heh, so I stayed there she went,
she stayed with a woman that worked for her, a Polish woman, its too bad that we, an old woman, she
said I would come to them, running, like a puppy, heh, but she was old, she passed away.
Did they marry very fast?
Did you marry very quickly?
What? Quickly? No, not quickly, eh, it didn't take too long, maybe a year? About a year.
And when did he decide to leave Poland?
When did you decide to leave Poland?
Poland? we immediately went to to to, where did we go? Ah? Heh, heh, she
'49?
SpNN [German text]
[German text]
They went to Berlin?
Where? To
You arrived at Berlin?
We were in Berlin, we lived there, and we had a baby there in Berlin, yes?
Yes, yes.
Where?
Yes yes, in Berlin?
We had a baby there.
Ah hah And then in '49 you decided to go to Israel.
She already, eh eh, because eh because I said about, eh, about
Demjanjuk that he, heh, heh, heh, that he also killed people.
He's saying again that she's mad at me
Yes, I know.
In' 49 he came to Israel?
Yes.
In '49
I, Demja, Demjanjuk is in, in is in a hospital now, I believe, he's ill ill, ill, ill.
Demjanjuk is in a hospital now, he's sick.
No he's in prison.
Eh?
He's in prison, tell him, tell him
Eh, he's in prison
He's what?
He's in prison now, Demjanjuk
Where is he?
He's in prison, in prison.
In prison? Ah.
I will send you somebody who will tell about what's happening he will come in ten days.
Yes, fine.
Eh, someone, she will send somebody to tell you all that's
happening there, he will come in ten days.
Yes, fine.
I will send him, ok?
Um ok, you came to Israel
You came to Israel in '49?
Have you ever been back to Sobibor?
When I came to Israel?
Can you please?
We were, I was I was in Poland, in Poland, and from Poland we went to
And have you been back to Sobibor?
we came to Germany, and we had an uncle living abroad
and how did it happen? I don't remember anymore
Have you been back to Sobibor?
What?
Sobibor?
Yes, have you been back there?
We went back in, each year they do an anniversary, I mean, eh
A ceremony?
Every year there's a ceremony
We went back, we were in, in where we were, at the camp we've been there several times.
What's he saying?
Every year there's a ceremony there and we've been there a few times.
Mmhmm. Is there something we have forgotten? Can you please ask him?
Is there something we forgot to ask?
Forgot to ask?
Yes, maybe you have more things that you want to tell us?
No, you can ask, I I said all there was to say. In Zamosh I met her
Mmhmm.
What's he saying?
He saying um, well, you can ask him whatever you want, and he, he said that in Zamosh he met her.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, thank you very, very much.
This is a translation made by
Dana Torres.
And the place is
Holon.
And the day is
Um the date is um, February 10th, 2010